recently reread Pastor John Gichinga’s Cry of the Heart, a tribute to Prof Emmy Mwenesi Gichinga, his wife of 32 years who died of breast cancer. With an incidence of 34 per 100,000 Kenyan women diagnosed, the disease kills one in four of those diagnosed with it. In East Africa, the rate is 30.4 per 100,000. Written in 2014, John uses excerpts from Emmy’s diary for much of the book’s content. Emmy is seen as “an assertive woman of strong character” and a “sacrificial mother.” She continued to cook for her family even when she was critically ill. She wrote: “At times I feel that my husband makes some very unkind and insensitive remarks e.g. ‘I have to use a stick to keep her down.’ Or ‘Who said you have to make food for us; we can eat bread.’” Could this sense of invincibility have played a role in Emmy’s delayed diagnosis? Could she have been so busy caring for her family that she downplayed early-warning signs of cancer until it was too late? Emmy strength was evident in the establishment of several groups “using her clout, professionalism and popularity within the Church,” writes John. “They included support groups for spouses living in abusive marriages, another for separated and divorced men and women, and yet a third one for professional women in different careers, both married and single.” She handled her multiple roles deftly until she was diagnosed with breast cancer in April 2009. She died on January 28, 2010. Managing her psychotherapy clinic, GEM Counselling Services, and teaching counselling psychology at Tangaza College of the Catholic University of Eastern Africa could have taken a heavy toll on her body. Last wishes At a time when “her legs had swelled to almost twice their normal size,” she still insisted on driving herself to work. John “stared at her in amazement” unable to restrain her. GEM was so dear to Emmy that in Cry of the Heart, John makes several references to it. He writes in Chapter 8: “Emmy’s motivation to fight and live longer was fuelled by her love for teaching at the Tangaza College, her dedication to her counselling practice and her longing to see her first grandchild born.” Her grandchild was born four days after her grandmother’s death and was at the burial. When she died struggling to speak, John writes: “Was she trying to tell me her last wishes about her GEM counselling practice? “For a long time, I was tormented by these speculations and I longed to know what she was trying to say.” He had previously asked Emmy: “Just in case things don’t go the way we want them to go and something happens to you, what would you wish for us to do with GEM Counselling Services?” Emmy’s initial response was that “it was too painful a subject to even contemplate.” She later told John: “When I am very sure I am going, it will take me only three hours to write down all my wishes.”It was not to be. Just 10 days before she died, Emmy steadfastly clung to the hope of healing. She wrote in her diary: “I am trusting God to heal me. I know God will heal me and I am holding on to that.” The illness took its toll on John. He brought her water to take her medicines and propped her up on pillows, but refused to accompany her to the Nairobi Hospital laboratory when she was having her breast removed. Terminal illness “As a man, I found it difficult to understand the rationale for such a visit… what all the fuss was about a piece of tissue,” he wrote. But he later admitted: “I deeply regretted my insensitiveness and lack of empathy for Emmy during perhaps the most traumatic part of her battle with cancer.” Emmy wrote in her diary: “John doesn’t seem to care for me any more… I sent an SOS to both Marys [family friends]; I expected them to arrange to talk to my husband but they didn’t. I feel worthless as far as John is concerned. I feel I am a problem in his life.” John uses examples from his pastoral ministry to explain the incident. He had interacted with many caregivers who found it difficult to cope in situations of terminal illness, chronic disease or disability. “They fled from the marriage altogether leaving the family to deal with the situation. Although wives/ mothers do occasionally take flight, more men than women tend to flee. Our women certainly have God-given strength and resilience that few of us men have,” he wrote. A message Anna (Emmy’s sister) sent to John gives some clues to the situation at the time: “You reacted with shock when you saw her hair had fallen out; you told her to tie on a head scarf. She said that when you saw her missing breast, it shocked you.” John recognises that “Emmy craved for more show of affection through hugs than in normal times.” However, he says showing her more affection “would have been interpreted as being patronising or behaving in pity, either of which would have driven proudly independent Emmy, mad.” John is now more philosophical about life: “None of us knows exactly how or when we will die. The Bible… teaches that the concerns of this life, that we regard to be important, are irrelevant after death.”   Conservationists say construction defied a court order halting the project. Regional bloc says its ready for action as reports of ceasefire violations rise.