Natural disasters are driving at least 26 million people around the world into poverty each year, and costing economies more than $500 billion. A new World Bank report titled Unbreakable: Building Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters, warns that the combined human and economic impacts of extreme weather on poverty are far more devastating than previously understood. In fact, it may have been underestimated by up to 60 per cent, because the impact on poor people was largely ignored. “Severe climate shocks threaten to roll back decades of progress against poverty,” said World Bank Group’s President Jim Yong Kim. “Storms, floods and droughts have dire human and economic consequences, with poor people often paying the heaviest price. Building resilience to disasters not only makes economic sense, it is a moral imperative.” In all of the 117 countries studied, the effect on wellbeing, measured in terms of lost consumption, is found to be larger than the $520 billion a year in asset losses, largely because disasters affect poor people who have no or limited ability to cope. According to the World Bank, previous research had underestimated the impact of natural disasters because they had measured the cost by assessing damage to physical assets. The report, co-authored with the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), was released last week at the United Nations Climate Conference (COP 22) in Marrakech, Morocco. It assesses the benefits of efforts made in building resilience in the countries that were studied. These include early warning systems, improved access to personal banking, insurance policies, and social protection systems such as cash programmes that could help people better respond to and recover from shocks. It finds that these measures combined, would help countries and communities save $100 billion a year and reduce the overall impact of disasters on wellbeing by 20 per cent. In Kenya, for example, the research showed that the social protection system provided additional resources to vulnerable farmers well before the 2015 drought, helping them prepare for and mitigate its impacts. Unexpected shocks “Countries are enduring a growing number of unexpected shocks as a result of climate change,” said Stephane Hallegatte, a GFDRR economist and lead author of the report. “One dollar in losses affects poor and marginalised far more because their livelihoods depend on few assets and their subsistence is closer to subsistence level.” She added: “Poor people need social and financial protection from disasters that cannot be avoided. With risk policies in place, we have the opportunity to prevent millions of people from falling into poverty.” But even as countries take steps to build resilience against the changing climate, 2016 is set to be the hottest year in history — higher than the record-breaking temperatures in 2015. Preliminary data shows that global temperatures are approximately 1.2° Celsius above pre-industrial levels, according to the World Meteorological Organisation. Temperatures for January to September 2016 have been about 0.88° Celsius above the average 14°C for the 1961-1990 reference period, which is used by WMO as a baseline. Temperatures spiked in the early months of the year because of the El Niño event of 2015-16. Preliminary data for October temperatures shows that they are at a sufficiently high level for 2016 to remain on track as the hottest year on record. This would mean that 16 of the 17 hottest years on record have been in this century (1998 was the other one). Another year, another record The year started with an extreme heat wave in South Africa, exacerbated by the ongoing drought. Many weather stations reported all-time temperatures, including 42.7°C in Pretoria and 38.9°C in Johannesburg on January 7. Record or near-record temperatures occurred in parts of the Middle East and North Africa. Mitribah in Kuwait recorded 54.0°C on July 21; the following day, 53.9°C was recorded in Basra (Iraq) and 53.0°C in Delhoran (Iran). “Another year. Another record. The high temperatures we saw in 2015 are set to be beaten in 2016,” said WMO’s secretary-general Petteri Taalas in a statement. The data also shows that long-term climate change indicators are record-breaking. For example, concentrations of major greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have continued to increase to new records. Ocean heat was boosted by the El Niño event, contributing to coral reef bleaching and an above-average sea-level rise. Already, sea levels have risen by about 15 millimetres between November 2014 and February 2016, as a result of El Niño. This is well above the post-1993 trend of three to 3.5 mm per year. READ: ‘Monster’ El Niño subsides, La Niña hitting soon “WMO is working to improve monitoring of greenhouse gas emissions to help countries reduce them,” said Mr Taalas. “More impact-based weather forecasts and early warning systems will save lives both now and in the years ahead.” According to Mr Taalas, the occurrence and impact of extreme events has risen, with “‘Once in a generation” heat waves and flooding becoming more regular. A few weather-related disasters, such as landslides and hurricanes have also been recorded this year. Hurricane Matthew in October, for example, killed 546 confirmed in Haiti, and injured 438 more. It also caused damage in Cuba, the Bahamas and led to major flooding in South Carolina. Typhoon Lionrock caused destructive flooding and heavy casualties in Korea, and Cyclone Winston was the most severe tropical cyclone on record to affect Fiji. In total, there have been 78 tropical cyclones globally as of October 31. Humanitarian crisis The Yangtze basin in China had its most significant summer floods since 1999, killing 310 people and causing an estimated $14 billion in damage. Flooding and landslides in Sri Lanka in mid-May left more than 200 people dead or missing, and displaced several hundred thousand. Above-normal seasonal rainfall in the Sahel led to significant flooding in the Niger River basin, with the river reaching its highest levels in about 50 years in Mali. Major droughts also affected several parts of the world, most of them associated with the El Niño event. Southern Africa experienced a second consecutive bad rainy season in 2015-16. The World Food Programme estimates that 17 million people will require assistance during the lean season ahead of the next harvest in early 2017. All these have led to a humanitarian crisis. According to the International Organisation for Migration, population migration is expected to increase as a result of more frequent and potentially more intense weather-related disasters, competition and conflict over shrinking resources, and rising sea levels rendering coastal and low-lying zones uninhabitable. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reports that last year there were 19.2 million new displacements associated with weather, water, climate and geophysical hazards in 113 countries, more than twice as many as for conflict and violence. Of these, weather-related hazards triggered 14.7 million displacements around the world, with South and East Asia dominating. Equivalent data for 2016 is not yet available. Extreme weather and climate related events influenced by the strong El-Niño in 2015/2016 had significant negative impacts on agriculture and food security, affecting more than 60 million people around the world, according to the Food and Agriculture Organisation. The FAO reports that the agriculture sector suffers the greatest impact, absorbing 22 per cent of all the economic costs in natural disasters. The WMO published the provisional statement for 2016 to inform COP22. The final statement will be released in early 2017. It complements a report on the 2011-2015 global climate, which was also submitted to COP22 to give a longer-term picture of the climate and to address multi-year events like droughts.   The Rockefeller Foundation president, Judith Rodin spoke to Allan Olingo on its interventions in Africa’s agriculture and its impact on productivity, food supplies, farmer profits and resilient communities. Conservationists say construction defied a court order halting the project. Regional bloc says its ready for action as reports of ceasefire violations rise.