Last week, my editor received an email from her airline of choice informing her that on an upcoming flight she was eligible for an upgrade to business class. I could tell she was bursting with excitement as the email, which she forwarded to me, was complete with pictures of the Premium Class cabin flat beds and a very swanky looking interior. Going by the tone of her brief email, I could tell that she was picturing herself in that dreamy luxurious cabin. In any case, during the holiday season a little self-pampering is well deserved. But like every other cost savvy traveller, in the closing of her email she sought to know if the upgrade was worth considering. My response to her burst her bubble. Is an upgrade to first or business class really worth it? And if it is, under what circumstances should you consider an upgrade? First, airlines hardly offer free upgrades and, even when they do, it is under extraordinary circumstances. Contrary to the common belief among travellers, being a frequent flyer does not necessarily make one eligible for a free upgrade. However, where free upgrades are at hand due to reasons like overbooking, airlines are most likely to upgrade elite members of their frequent flyer club before other passengers. You are most likely to pay for your upgrade in cash or in frequent flyer miles. Hats off to airline marketing teams for the personal touch they add to client communication. Receiving such an email, as my editor did after booking and paying for a flight, would certainly make you feel like someone the airline had noticed. The reality, however, is that airlines in the region are experiencing short term demand peaks due to holiday travels and are out to maximise revenues. The upgrade email is most likely a system generated communication triggered to go to countless other prospects booking their flights during this season. Economy sold out Last week, my editor received an email from her airline of choice informing her that on an upcoming flight she was eligible for an upgrade to business class.I could tell she was bursting with excitement as the email, which she forwarded to me, was complete with pictures of the Premium Class cabin flat beds and a very swanky looking interior.Going by the tone of her brief email, I could tell that she was picturing herself in that dreamy luxurious cabin. In any case, during the holiday season a little self-pampering is well deserved.But like every other cost savvy traveller, in the closing of her email she sought to know if the upgrade was worth considering. My response to her burst her bubble.Is an upgrade to first or business class really worth it? And if it is, under what circumstances should you consider an upgrade?First, airlines hardly offer free upgrades and, even when they do, it is under extraordinary circumstances. Contrary to the common belief among travellers, being a frequent flyer does not necessarily make one eligible for a free upgrade. However, where free upgrades are at hand due to reasons like overbooking, airlines are most likely to upgrade elite members of their frequent flyer club before other passengers.You are most likely to pay for your upgrade in cash or in frequent flyer miles.Hats off to airline marketing teams for the personal touch they add to client communication. Receiving such an email, as my editor did after booking and paying for a flight, would certainly make you feel like someone the airline had noticed.The reality, however, is that airlines in the region are experiencing short term demand peaks due to holiday travels and are out to maximise revenues. The upgrade email is most likely a system generated communication triggered to go to countless other prospects booking their flights during this season.Economy sold out