Travelling through Kenya over the past six months inspired Korean ceramics artist Kim Sung-Jin to create a series of clay vessels. An exhibition of his works, titled The 21st Kim Sung-Jin African Formative Ceramics, is on at the Nairobi National Museum until January 5. Kim says he is stimulated by cultural art and by observing communities co-existing with wildlife. I like to express the relationship between forests, animals, and people through the art work, he said. The theme of the exhibition is Memories of the Beginning and Nature of Kenya: Forests, Animals, People. Animal is a bust of an oblong face on a cylindrical neck. It has arched eyebrows and a pair of curved horns, and its dark charcoal colour with sections of pale brown are evocative of natural world elements. The half-human half-animal face is his way of expressing the human-animal link, said Lydia Gatundu-Galavu, the art curator at the Nairobi Museum. Forest is a tall, oval pot with five curved handles. A swathe of orange runs along the mostly smooth, black surface. Kim uses the traditional wheel-throwing technique. He continues to hone his expertise by participating in competitions and exhibitions. Born in South Korea, Kim has a Master of Fine Arts in ceramics from Dankook University. Currently he is on a one-year teaching residency at the Department of Fine Art and Design at Kenyatta University in Nairobi. Kim says he is particularly excited by how Kenyan students show an interest in new ceramic expressions. Ms Galavu said that the educational component is one of the most significant aspects of showcasing the professor. Over the festive season, Kim has been sharing his practical skills with youth at interactive sessions at the museum. In addition to his coursework, Kim finds time for creating new pottery and has sculpted some 50 pieces over his six months in Kenya. Travelling through Kenya over the past six months inspired Korean ceramics artist Kim Sung-Jin to create a series of clay vessels. An exhibition of his works, titled The 21st Kim Sung-Jin African Formative Ceramics, is on at the Nairobi National Museum until January 5. Kim says he is stimulated by cultural art and by observing communities co-existing with wildlife. I like to express the relationship between forests, animals, and people through the art work, he said.The theme of the exhibition is Memories of the Beginning and Nature of Kenya: Forests, Animals, People. Animal is a bust of an oblong face on a cylindrical neck. It has arched eyebrows and a pair of curved horns, and its dark charcoal colour with sections of pale brown are evocative of natural world elements. The half-human half-animal face is his way of expressing the human-animal link, said Lydia Gatundu-Galavu, the art curator at the Nairobi Museum.Forest is a tall, oval pot with five curved handles. A swathe of orange runs along the mostly smooth, black surface. Kim uses the traditional wheel-throwing technique. He continues to hone his expertise by participating in competitions and exhibitions. Born in South Korea, Kim has a Master of Fine Arts in ceramics from Dankook University. Currently he is on a one-year teaching residency at the Department of Fine Art and Design at Kenyatta University in Nairobi. Kim says he is particularly excited by how Kenyan students show an interest in new ceramic expressions. Ms Galavu said that the educational component is one of the most significant aspects of showcasing the professor. Over the festive season, Kim has been sharing his practical skills with youth at interactive sessions at the museum.In addition to his coursework, Kim finds time for creating new pottery and has sculpted some 50 pieces over his six months in Kenya.