Another year draws to a close and another trust is reborn. Following the rebirth of the Kuona, now run on a daily basis by its artists, comes the news that what used to be the RaMoMA has had a change of name, a change of place and a change of trustees and is now looking for a change of home. RaMoMA, the Rahimtullah Museum of Modern Art, lost its gallery in Parklands, Nairobi, to a property developer in 2010. It was then to move to the refitted Rahimtullah Library in the heart of the CBD, but that move collapsed in 2013 and its collection of 120 paintings, drawings, prints and sculptures was dispersed. Now the collection has been reunited to the west of the city at the One-Off Gallery in Rosslyn, owned by Carol Lees, doyenne of Kenyan curators who used to run the RaMoMA. Somewhat prosaically renamed East African Visual Arts Trust, (EAVAT), its new board includes Lees, Anis Pringle who is a consultant at accountants KPMG, and the publisher Susan Githuku. Immediate plans include an exhibition of some of the collection s finest works at the National Museums of Kenya in the first half of the new year. It should be a cracker, with paintings and drawings by Peterson Kamwathi, Beatrice Wanjiku, Mary Collis and Richard Kimathi, plus works by Watatu veterans Sane Wadu and Kivuthi Mbuno, and sculptures by Morris Foit and Jackson Wanjau. We re excited, said Lees, and at last we can look forward with confidence to a bright future. Lees is currently showing 24 works, including paintings by three of these artists Kamwathi, Kimathi and Wanjiku at the One-Off in an end-of-year celebration of her gallery regulars. But what took my eye there was an astonishing group of six small paintings of a typical plastic events chair you see them at almost every function in East Africa by Peter Ngugi. Ngugi, renowned for his meticulous paintings of assorted wildlife that to me had all the appeal of table mats, must take the prize for being one of the region s most improved painters. In a series of exhibitions he has espoused various causes and attacked political expediency and complacency in numerous beautifully finished paintings, often embellished with wire, bottle tops, plastic cut outs and recording tapes. Edgy, thoughtful and a flawless finisher, Ngugi here presents these six chairs, each in a different colour of the rainbow, representing the lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans-gender people in our society. The point of Rainbow Talks Africa is that the chairs are all empty. No member of these persecuted groups sits openly among us, nor does anyone occupy the chairs to hear about the need for tolerance and justice for every citizen. Here we have six simple paintings, refulgent with intelligence, that simply ask us Why? Another year draws to a close and another trust is reborn.Following the rebirth of the Kuona, now run on a daily basis by its artists, comes the news that what used to be the RaMoMA has had a change of name, a change of place and a change of trustees and is now looking for a change of home.RaMoMA, the Rahimtullah Museum of Modern Art, lost its gallery in Parklands, Nairobi, to a property developer in 2010. It was then to move to the refitted Rahimtullah Library in the heart of the CBD, but that move collapsed in 2013 and its collection of 120 paintings, drawings, prints and sculptures was dispersed.Now the collection has been reunited to the west of the city at the One-Off Gallery in Rosslyn, owned by Carol Lees, doyenne of Kenyan curators who used to run the RaMoMA.Somewhat prosaically renamed East African Visual Arts Trust, (EAVAT), its new board includes Lees, Anis Pringle who is a consultant at accountants KPMG, and the publisher Susan Githuku.Immediate plans include an exhibition of some of the collection s finest works at the National Museums of Kenya in the first half of the new year.It should be a cracker, with paintings and drawings by Peterson Kamwathi, Beatrice Wanjiku, Mary Collis and Richard Kimathi, plus works by Watatu veterans Sane Wadu and Kivuthi Mbuno, and sculptures by Morris Foit and Jackson Wanjau. We re excited, said Lees, and at last we can look forward with confidence to a bright future. Lees is currently showing 24 works, including paintings by three of these artists Kamwathi, Kimathi and Wanjiku at the One-Off in an end-of-year celebration of her gallery regulars.But what took my eye there was an astonishing group of six small paintings of a typical plastic events chair you see them at almost every function in East Africa by Peter Ngugi.Ngugi, renowned for his meticulous paintings of assorted wildlife that to me had all the appeal of table mats, must take the prize for being one of the region s most improved painters. In a series of exhibitions he has espoused various causes and attacked political expediency and complacency in numerous beautifully finished paintings, often embellished with wire, bottle tops, plastic cut outs and recording tapes.Edgy, thoughtful and a flawless finisher, Ngugi here presents these six chairs, each in a different colour of the rainbow, representing the lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans-gender people in our society. The point of Rainbow Talks Africa is that the chairs are all empty. No member of these persecuted groups sits openly among us, nor does anyone occupy the chairs to hear about the need for tolerance and justice for every citizen.Here we have six simple paintings, refulgent with intelligence, that simply ask us Why? 