Last week, my editor received an email from her airline of choice informing her that on an upcoming flight she was eligible for an upgrade to business class. I could tell she was bursting with excitement as the email, which she forwarded to me, was complete with pictures of the Premium Class cabin — flat beds and a very swanky looking interior. Going by the tone of her brief email, I could tell that she was picturing herself in that dreamy luxurious cabin. In any case, during the holiday season a little self-pampering is well deserved. But like every other cost savvy traveller, in the closing of her email she sought to know if the upgrade was worth considering. My response to her burst her bubble. Is an upgrade to first or business class really worth it? And if it is, under what circumstances should you consider an upgrade? First, airlines hardly offer free upgrades and, even when they do, it is under extraordinary circumstances. Contrary to the common belief among travellers, being a frequent flyer does not necessarily make one eligible for a free upgrade. However, where free upgrades are at hand due to reasons like overbooking, airlines are most likely to upgrade elite members of their frequent flyer club before other passengers. You are most likely to pay for your upgrade in cash or in frequent flyer miles. Hats off to airline marketing teams for the personal touch they add to client communication. Receiving such an email, as my editor did after booking and paying for a flight, would certainly make you feel like someone the airline had noticed. The reality, however, is that airlines in the region are experiencing short term demand peaks due to holiday travels and are out to maximise revenues. The upgrade email is most likely a system generated communication triggered to go to countless other prospects booking their flights during this season. Economy sold out As most people fly in groups and families during the holidays, the majority will purchase economy class tickets, and seats in this class are likely to be sold out with business class remaining empty due to the high costs. By offering a chance to upgrade to business class, airlines expect those biting the bait to pay more and move to premium class while freeing the economy class seat for last-minute buyers who will expectedly pay more. Ultimately, what one pays for economy class, plus the upgrade fee, comes to what you would normally pay for a full business class seat, at best slightly discounted. However, the best time to consider paying cash for upgrading would be during off-peak season, as that is the only time airlines are serious about discounts. Frequent flyers considering upgrading using miles need to be cautious of peak season offers as airlines will usually charge more miles than off-peak upgrades. But even where the airlines get the better part of you, and you cannot resist the urge to upgrade to premier classes of travel, make it count by picking a flight that is at least three hours long, to enjoy the full trappings of business class. Upgrading to business class on a flight that is under an hour will most likely leave you feeling cheated, as such short flights will not have the full “royal treatment” you envisage and can write home about. For instance, the Nairobi-Mombasa route is only 45 minutes long. By the time you are done ogling the flat bed, figuring out how the inflight entertainment works, or stretching your feet in the spacious legroom, you will be landing. That is of course assuming that the airline uses wide body aircraft as opposed to the narrow body aeroplanes that have basic business class configurations. At the end of the day, a chance at upgrading is at the discretion of the airline, whether paid for or free, and will usually be done as per their prevailing policy. Keep in mind that every offer from your airline has terms and conditions. Take your time to read the small print and understand the full details and implications. Here’s to an upgraded 2017. Michael Otieno is an aviation consultant based in Nairobi. Twitter: @pmykee143, E-mail: michael@sadimsolutions.com   Conservationists say construction defied a court order halting the project. Regional bloc says its ready for action as reports of ceasefire violations rise.