Presidents Uhuru Kenyatta and Tanzania's John Pombe Magufuli have directed their foreign ministers to form a joint commission to chart the way forward on future bilateral relations, even as the leaders avoided speaking on hot button issues that have recently strained ties between the two neighbours. The joint ministerial team, spearheaded by Kenya's Foreign Cabinet Secretary Amina Mohamed and her Tanzanian counterpart Bernard Membe, is expected to meet in Tanzania before year-end. Dr Magufuli and his host Mr Kenyatta, however, did not share details of the upcoming talks. They also steered clear of addressing the oil pipeline issue, the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPAs) and work permits for Kenyans operating in Tanzania. READ: Sigh of relief as Europe gives East Africa four months to sign EPA Business opportunities Dr Magufuli however welcomed Kenyans to invest in his country, citing numerous business opportunities. The Tanzanian leader acknowledged the crucial role Kenyan investors play in the Dar es Salaam economy, noting that 529 Kenyan firms operate in the country, employing 56,260 people and their collective investments valued at $1.7 billion. He added that trade volumes between the two countries have grown from Tsh652.9 billion ($300 million) in 2010 to Tsh2.004 trillion ($940 million) in 2016.This makes Kenya the largest African investor in Tanzania, he said. "My visit today is to cement the good relations between Tanzania and Kenya" said Dr Magufuli.   The two countries also agreed to co-operate on security issues and expedite link roads such as the Bagamoyo-Malindi highway, which is one of the roads spearheaded by the East African Community (EAC) to boost cross-border trade. Of frosty relations President Magufuli also sought to allay fears that relations between him and President Kenyatta have been frosty. “Since phone calls are not public, most people imagine that we don’t communicate,” President Magufuli said, seeking to demystify the widespread perception that the two leaders have been engaged on some sort of cold war with indications that Nairobi supported his opponent, Edward Lowassa in the 2015 elections. The Tanzanian leader arrived Monday morning for a two-day State visit, making it his maiden visit to Kenya since he became president in October 2015. Additional reporting by Fred Oluoch   Non-tariff barriers and double taxation are some of the key challenges facing businesses in the East African Community. Conservationists say construction defied a court order halting the project. Regional bloc says its ready for action as reports of ceasefire violations rise.