Rwanda has banned the trade of Samsung Galaxy Note 7 phones on its market as a measure to protect consumers from using the devices that are said to have a defective charging unit. The country becomes the first African country to do so after the devices were reported to be catching fire. The acting director general of Rwanda Utilities and Regulatory Authority (Rura), Patrick Nyirishema, said importation and distribution of the smartphones had been barred for safety reasons. “Consumers who may have individually bought them abroad are required to power them down and return them to where they were purchased,” Mr Nyirishema said in a statement. Note 7s have also been banned on flights by global and regional carriers including RwandAir and Kenya Airways. There is however no official statistics available to show the number of the Note 7 devices in the Rwandan market. There have been incidences however of Rwandans purchasing the handsets oversees and returning with them. “In light of recent incidents and concerns raised by Samsung about its Galaxy Note 7 devices, RwandAir has banned the transportation of Samsung Galaxy Note 7 mobile phones as cargo aboard its flights. Passengers are strongly advised to ensure that no mobile phone is used during flight and not to stow them in any checked baggage,” the airline said. Samsung issued a recall of the devices from the global market on September 15 after numerous reports of the phones exploding during or after charging. On Thursday, the electronics giant re-sounded its recall by offering swap incentives to the Note 7 users. Two days earlier, the firm said it was halting the production of the smartphones after reports that the replacements it had offered were also catching fire. The company is offering upto $100 in bill credit for consumers who chose to swap for another Samsung phone, while those opting for a refund will get $25. This story has been updated.   The firm's worst-ever recall could cost the company as much as $17 billion, spelling an almost certain end for the ill-fated premium model. Conservationists say construction defied a court order halting the project. Regional bloc says its ready for action as reports of ceasefire violations rise.