Around this time 20 years ago, Ugandans were gripped with excitement as for the first time, free, universal primary education was on the verge of becoming a reality. The country had held its first ever direct presidential elections earlier in 1996; in his campaign, victorious president Yoweri Museveni had declared the educational initiative, which was to kick off early 1997. At first, the offer was to educate four children per family but soon due to pressure of public demand, it was opened to all children of the country. Twenty years later, the government has released a damning report on the education sector. The Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) last year conducted a National Assessment of Progress in Education survey on the numeracy and literacy of the schoolchildren, their teachers and the tutors who taught the teachers that had just graduated from the training colleges. If you were only given the results and asked to guess who had authored the report, you would be forgiven for thinking it was malicious anti-government propaganda. Eight out of every 10 primary school teachers could neither read nor solve basic primary-level mathematics questions. Less than 20 per cent of their tutors could interpret graphs in similar exams, while only 5.7 per cent final-year student teachers passed. Presenting the findings of the survey, UNEB executive secretary Daniel Odongo twisted the knife in the nation s wound by pointing out that these students are now in the field teaching our children. The first question that comes to mind on being confronted with these results is why it took so long to make these findings. Children born in 1996 have now entered university while those who first benefited from UPE in upper primary in 1997 are now over 20-years-old. Will national leaders act? The survey has been done by a competent and relevant government body, the results are out and we can expect Parliament to consider it a matter of national importance unless the effectiveness of the education that has been given to a whole generation of Ugandans does not matter to them. In case the national leaders decide that it is important to act on this report urgently, it would do everybody a lot of good to remember three points: First, that while this survey only covered the education sector, workers in all sectors are produced by the education system. Therefore, the 80 per cent ineffectiveness of schools could be about the same in all other sectors relying on the products of our schools and institutions of higher learning. Although these findings are not so different from those of regional bodies like Twaweza, this survey was done by the Uganda government and its motive is thus above suspicion. Findings by other bodies which have, for instance, found that Ugandan medics score lowest in the region in diagnosis meaning they are widest off the mark in establishing what ails a patient, need to be taken seriously. We also need to blow the dust off those studies that a couple of years back found Ugandan workers productivity to be lower than most in the region. Second, to make good use of these research findings, it helps to stop getting instinctively defensive, a typically Ugandan reaction to criticism. Our intellectuals have for decades castigated old syllabuses that included studies of other countries. Agriculture in North America has always been targeted as a useless component of our geography lessons. European explorations in Africa were also attacked as colonial. One John Speke has never been allowed to rest peacefully in his grave for the sin of being credited with discovering the source of the Nile when there were Basoga people already living there, even if the Basoga had not yet published to the outside world the existence of the source of the world s longest river. Around this time 20 years ago, Ugandans were gripped with excitement as for the first time, free, universal primary education was on the verge of becoming a reality. The country had held its first ever direct presidential elections earlier in 1996; in his campaign, victorious president Yoweri Museveni had declared the educational initiative, which was to kick off early 1997. At first, the offer was to educate four children per family but soon due to pressure of public demand, it was opened to all children of the country. Twenty years later, the government has released a damning report on the education sector.The Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) last year conducted a National Assessment of Progress in Education survey on the numeracy and literacy of the schoolchildren, their teachers and the tutors who taught the teachers that had just graduated from the training colleges. If you were only given the results and asked to guess who had authored the report, you would be forgiven for thinking it was malicious anti-government propaganda. Eight out of every 10 primary school teachers could neither read nor solve basic primary-level mathematics questions. Less than 20 per cent of their tutors could interpret graphs in similar exams, while only 5.7 per cent final-year student teachers passed.Presenting the findings of the survey, UNEB executive secretary Daniel Odongo twisted the knife in the nation s wound by pointing out that these students are now in the field teaching our children. The first question that comes to mind on being confronted with these results is why it took so long to make these findings. Children born in 1996 have now entered university while those who first benefited from UPE in upper primary in 1997 are now over 20-years-old. Will national leaders act?The survey has been done by a competent and relevant government body, the results are out and we can expect Parliament to consider it a matter of national importance unless the effectiveness of the education that has been given to a whole generation of Ugandans does not matter to them.In case the national leaders decide that it is important to act on this report urgently, it would do everybody a lot of good to remember three points:First, that while this survey only covered the education sector, workers in all sectors are produced by the education system. Therefore, the 80 per cent ineffectiveness of schools could be about the same in all other sectors relying on the products of our schools and institutions of higher learning. Although these findings are not so different from those of regional bodies like Twaweza, this survey was done by the Uganda government and its motive is thus above suspicion. Findings by other bodies which have, for instance, found that Ugandan medics score lowest in the region in diagnosis meaning they are widest off the mark in establishing what ails a patient, need to be taken seriously. We also need to blow the dust off those studies that a couple of years back found Ugandan workers productivity to be lower than most in the region.Second, to make good use of these research findings, it helps to stop getting instinctively defensive, a typically Ugandan reaction to criticism. Our intellectuals have for decades castigated old syllabuses that included studies of other countries. Agriculture in North America has always been targeted as a useless component of our geography lessons.European explorations in Africa were also attacked as colonial. One John Speke has never been allowed to rest peacefully in his grave for the sin of being credited with discovering the source of the Nile when there were Basoga people already living there, even if the Basoga had not yet published to the outside world the existence of the source of the world s longest river.