Malawians have been asking, to anyone who cares to know, about the whereabouts of their President Peter Mutharika. The former law lecturer at Washington University and now president of the landlocked country since May 2014, travelled to New York for the 71st UN General Assembly on September 16th. The meeting ended on September 26th and it was expected that every head of state would return to their homeland. Mutharika did not and his absence has caused a buzz in Malawi. Using the #BringBackMutharika hashtag, Malawians on Twitter have posed questions, criticised government officials and gossiped about the man’s health. The problem has largely been poor communication from government officials and local newspapers have lambasted the lack of coherent information. Privately-owned newspaper Nyasa Times wrote of “their incredible inability to answer the many questions making rounds on tongues of the people of Malawi.” And according to Dr Boni Dulani who teaches political science at the University of Malawi, they should be shown the door. “Peter Mutharika should fire his PR team. They have embarrassed him and Malawi,” he argued on Thursday. “Of course, a president practicing 1940 politics in 2016 is an embarrassment to himself.” It could be that Mutharika’s own officials have been in the dark or that they were simply asked to keep silent about it. 'Meeting people' Nearly a month since the General Assembly, the Malawi government spokesman Malison Ndau told the BBC on Thursday that Prof Mutharika was still meeting “a number of people one-by-one.” But the identity of these people or venue of the meetings was not revealed. On Tuesday October 11th, State House had put a date on the president’s return, on Sunday October 16th at 1pm (1100 GMT) and that in addition to attending the UN summit, he “also attended to various government businesses.” “The President shall arrive at Kamuzu International Airport (KIA) at 1300h,” said Presidential Press Secretary Mgeme Kalilani on a Facebook post. The lack of transparency however has seen Malawians challenge the government to provide footage of the meetings the president has been conducting. Speculation has been rife that the 76-year-old leader, whose elder brother Bingu wa Mutharika died of heart attack in 2012 while president, was unwell and admitted to a hospital in the US. Relatively stable With an estimated population of 16.8 million, Malawi has been relatively stable since 1991 when the one-party system was ended. It has held five presidential elections since. Yet the current failure to communicate adequately depicts a country still with a hangover of the past. “We have a system whose one foot is in autocracy and another in democracy and therefore operating in such a dual conflicting highway makes this country, its leadership, its citizenry and its politics move in insane circles,” Nyasa Times wrote in a commentary. Educated at Yale University, Mutharika rose to presidency after defeating incumbent Joyce Banda in May 2014. It is not surprising that Malawians are demanding to know the whereabouts of their president. When Bingu wa Mutharika collapsed in State House in April 5, 2012, he was reportedly rushed to South Africa for treatment and declared dead two days later. The confusion surrounding his health and death were so poorly communicated that the announcement was made on the day Joyce Banda, who had been Bingu’s vice-president, was sworn in as the new president. However a report commissioned later by President Banda revealed that Bingu had died in an ambulance on the way to Kamuzu Central Hospital, in Malawi and that the government had flown the president’s body to South Africa, where he was declared dead.   Conservationists say construction defied a court order halting the project. Regional bloc says its ready for action as reports of ceasefire violations rise.